Add trento Single Sign-on integration docs (#177)
SUSE/doc-unversioned: trento/migration/sso-integration.md

</note>
```

## Available protocols

- OpenID Connect (OIDC)

- Open Authorization 2.0 (OAuth 2)

- Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML)

## User Roles and Authentication

User authentication is entirely managed by the IDP, which is responsible for maintaining user accounts.
A user, who does not exist on the IDP, is unable to access the Trento web console.
During the installation process, a default admin user is defined using the `ADMIN_USER` variable, which defaults to `admin`. If the authenticated user’s IDP username matches this admin user's username, that user is automatically granted `all:all` permissions within Trento.
User permissions are entirely managed by Trento, they are not imported from the IDP. The abilities must be granted by some user with `all:all` or `all:users` abilities (**admin user initially**). This means that only basic user information is retrieved from the external IDP.

## OIDC

Trento integrates with an IDP that uses the OIDC protocol to authenticate users accessing the Trento web console.

### Enabling OIDC

OIDC authentication is **disabled by default**.

#### Enabling OIDC when using RPM packages

> Provide the following environment variables to trento-web configuration, which is stored at <filename>/etc/trento/trento-web</filename> and restart the application to enable OIDC integration.

Author: You already rearranged this, and it looks fine

```
# Required:
ENABLE_OIDC=true
OIDC_CLIENT_ID=<<OIDC_CLIENT_ID>>
OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET=<<OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET>>
OIDC_BASE_URL=<<OIDC_BASE_URL>>

# Optional:
OIDC_CALLBACK_URL=<<OIDC_CALLBACK_URL>>
```
#### Enabling OIDC when using Docker images

> Provide the following environment variables to the docker container and restart the application to enable OIDC integration.

Author: Changed by you XD

```bash
docker run -d \
-p 4000:4000 \
--name trento-web \
--network trento-net \
--add-host "host.docker.internal:host-gateway" \

...[other settings]...

# Required:
-e ENABLE_OIDC=true  \
-e OIDC_CLIENT_ID=<<OIDC_CLIENT_ID>> \
-e OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET=<<OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET>> \
-e OIDC_BASE_URL=<<OIDC_BASE_URL>> \

# Optional:
-e OIDC_CALLBACK_URL=<<OIDC_CALLBACK_URL>> \

...[other settings]...
```

### Available variables

OIDC_CLIENT_ID

: OIDC client id

OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET

: OIDC client secret

OIDC_BASE_URL

: OIDC base url

OIDC_CALLBACK_URL

: OIDC callback url where the IDP is redirecting once the authentication is completed (default value: <uri>https://#{TRENTO_WEB_ORIGIN}/auth/oidc_callback</uri>)

## OAuth 2.0

Trento integrates with an IDP that uses the OAuth 2 protocol to authenticate users accessing the Trento web console.

### Enabling OAuth 2.0

OAuth 2.0 authentication is **disabled by default**.

#### Enabling OAuth 2.0 when using RPM packages

> Provide the following environment variables to trento-web configuration, which is stored at <filename>/etc/trento/trento-web</filename> and restart the application to enable OAuth 2.0 integration.

Author: Same, already changed by you

### SAML IDP setup

Configure the existing IDP with the next minimum options to be able to connect with Trento's Service Provider (SP).

#### SAML user profile

Users provided by the SAML installation must have some few mandatory attributes in order to login in Trento. All of them are mandatory, even though their name is configurable.
The user profile must include attributes for: username, email, first name and last name.
This attributes must be mapped for all users wanting to connect to Trento.

By default, Trento expects the `username`, `email`, `firstName` and `lastName` attribute names. All these 4 attribute names are configurable using the next environment variables, following the same order: `SAML_USERNAME_ATTR_NAME`, `SAML_EMAIL_ATTR_NAME`, `SAML_FIRSTNAME_ATTR_NAME` and `SAML_LASTNAME_ATTR_NAME`.
So for example, if the IDP user profile username is defined as `attr:username`, `SAML_USERNAME_ATTR_NAME=attr:username` should be used.

#### Signing keys

Commonly, SAML protocol messages are signed with SSL. This is optional using Trento, and the signing is not required (even though it is recommended).

> If the IDP signs the messages, and expect signed messages back, certificates used by the SP (Trento in this case) must be provided to the IDP, the Certificate file in this case.

Reviewer: What's "SP" here? Service Provider? I've splitted the sentence a bit. But I'm not sure how to use the "the certificate file in this case". Could you clarify that?

```suggestion
If the IDP signs the messages and expect signed messages back. Certificates used by the Trento service provider must be provided to the IDP, the certificate file in this case.
```

Author: Let me rephrase this and move it to the top chapter, as a background information

> For this reason, Trento already provides a certificates set created during the installation. When Trento is installed the first time (does not matter the installation mode) the certificates are created, and the public certificate file content is available in the <uri>http://localhost:4000/api/public_keys</uri> route. 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this reason, Trento already provides a certificates set created during the installation. When Trento is installed the first time (does not matter the installation mode) the certificates are created, and the public certificate file content is available in the <uri>http://localhost:4000/api/public_keys</uri> route.

Use the following command to download the certificate:

```

OAUTH2_SCOPES

: OAUTH2 scopes, used to define the user values sent to the SP. It must be adjusted depending on IDP provider requirements (default value: `openid profile email`)

OAUTH2_CALLBACK_URL

: OAUTH2 callback url where the IDP is redirecting once the authentication is completed (default value: `https://#{TRENTO_WEB_ORIGIN}/auth/oauth2_callback`)

## Using SAML

Trento integrates with an IDP that uses the SAML protocol to authenticate users accessing the Trento web console. Trento will behave as a Service Provider (SP) in this case.

Commonly, SAML protocol messages are signed with SSL. This is optional using Trento, and the signing is not required (even though it is recommended).
If the IDP signs the messages, and expect signed messages back, certificates used by the SP (Trento in this case) must be provided to the IDP, the public certificate file in this case.

To use an existing SAML IDP, follow the next instrunctions to met the specific requirements. You need:

* Configure SAML IDP and user profiles
* Start Trento to generate the certificates and download them
* Provide the generated certificate to the IDP
* Restart Trento

### Configuring SAML IDP setup

> Configure the existing IDP with the next minimum options to be able to connect with Trento's Service Provider (SP).

Author: Yes...
Thank you

#### SAML user profile

Users provided by the SAML installation must have some few mandatory attributes to login in Trento. All of them are mandatory, even though their name is configurable.
The user profile must include attributes for: username, email, first name and last name.
This attributes must be mapped for all users wanting to connect to Trento.

By default, Trento expects the `username`, `email`, `firstName` and `lastName` attribute names. All these 4 attribute names are configurable using the next environment variables, following the same order: `SAML_USERNAME_ATTR_NAME`, `SAML_EMAIL_ATTR_NAME`, `SAML_FIRSTNAME_ATTR_NAME` and `SAML_LASTNAME_ATTR_NAME`.

> So for example, if the IDP user profile username is defined as `attr:username`, `SAML_USERNAME_ATTR_NAME=attr:username` should be used.

Author: Ok, this is how SAML works.
When you have a SAML IDP, you have a user profile (one) that is used to model all the users created in the IDP.
This user profile, has some fields, the typical ones are `email`, `name`, etc

Each IDP installation will have different naming for the fields though. Some might have `email`, others `userEmail`, others `attr:email`, etc

So what the users needs to do is:
1. Have the attributes in the user profile (which the name they prefer)
2. Configure trento with those names

Now, that I have listed you this, I will transform the content to something similar

#### SAML redirect URI

Once the login is done succesfully, the IDP redirects the session back to Trento. This redirection is done to `https://trento.example.com/sso/sp/consume/saml`, so this URI must be set as valid in the IDP.

> ### Get certificates from Trento

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Downloading certificates from Trento
```

Author: I'm going with `Getting` as you get the content as a string, not a file itself

> Trento provides a certificates set created during the installation. When Trento is installed the first time (does not matter the installation mode) the certificates are created, and the public certificate file content is available in the <uri>http://localhost:4000/api/public_keys</uri> route. 

Reviewer: I would rephrase it a bit:

```suggestion
Trento provides a certificates set created during the installation. Regardless of the installation mode, when Trento is installed the first time the certificates are created and the public certificate file content is available in the <uri>http://localhost:4000/api/public_keys</uri> route. 
```

Use the following command to download the certificate:

```bash
curl http://localhost:4000/api/public_keys
```
    

> Copy the content of the certificate from there, and provide it to the IDP. This way, the IDP will sign and verify the messages sent by both ends.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "provide it to the IDP"? And "both ends" means Trento and IDP, right?

```suggestion
Copy the content of the certificate from there and provide it to the IDP. This way, the IDP will sign and verify the messages sent by both ends.
```

Author: No, Trento already have it (it was created by Trento), so you need to copy the content and provide to the IDP, and we cannot say how you do that, because this depends on the IDP. But all IDPs will have the option to use it

Author: I will rephrase to `Copy the content of the certificate from there and provide it to the IDP. This way, the IDP will sign its messages and verify the messages received from Trento.`

### Restart Trento

Once the certificate is provided to the IDP, the IDP recreates its own <filename>metadata.xml</filename> file. This file defines which certificate is used to sign the messages by both sides. At this point, Trento Web must be restarted to use the new <filename>metadata.xml</filename> content.

> If the <option>SAML_METDATA_CONTENT</option> option is being used, the content of this variable must be updated with the new metadata. In the other hand, if <option>SAML_METADATA_URL</option> is used, the new metadata is automatically fetched. If neither of these steps are completed, communication will fail because the message signatures will not be recognized

Author: Yes, once you get the certificate from trento, you provide it to the IDP (each IDP will have its own way).
Now, the IDP will update its own IDP with the given certificate.
Some IDP has a endpoint that you can access using a url that returns you the content of the metadata. 
Others don't, and it just gives you some other way (plain text) for example. 

If you are in the 1st option (IDP has metadata endpoint), the easiest way is to use it (as if for some reason, you change something in the IDP, Trento will fetch the update automatically).

In the second case (IDP doesn't have an endpoint), you will need to copy the content of the metadata.xml (it is given as one lines string) in the `SAML_METADATA_CONTENT` variable.

### Enabling SAML when using RPM packages

To enable SAML when using RPM packages, proceed as follows:

1. Open the file <filename>/etc/trento/trento-web</filename>.
1. Add the following environment variables to this file.
   Required variables are:

```
# Required:
ENABLE_SAML=true
SAML_IDP_ID=<SAML_IDP_ID>
SAML_SP_ID=<SAML_SP_ID>
# Only SAML_METADATA_URL or SAML_METADATA_CONTENT must by provided
SAML_METADATA_URL=<SAML_METADATA_URL>
SAML_METADATA_CONTENT=<SAML_METADATA_CONTENT>

# Optional:
SAML_IDP_NAMEID_FORMAT=<SAML_IDP_NAMEID_FORMAT>
SAML_SP_DIR=<SAML_SP_DIR>
SAML_SP_ENTITY_ID=<SAML_SP_ENTITY_ID>
SAML_SP_CONTACT_NAME=<SAML_SP_CONTACT_NAME>
SAML_SP_CONTACT_EMAIL=<SAML_SP_CONTACT_EMAIL>
SAML_SP_ORG_NAME=<SAML_SP_ORG_NAME>
SAML_SP_ORG_DISPLAYNAME=<SAML_SP_ORG_DISPLAYNAME>
SAML_SP_ORG_URL=<SAML_SP_ORG_URL>
SAML_USERNAME_ATTR_NAME=<SAML_USERNAME_ATTR_NAME>
SAML_EMAIL_ATTR_NAME=<SAML_EMAIL_ATTR_NAME>
SAML_FIRSTNAME_ATTR_NAME=<SAML_FIRSTNAME_ATTR_NAME>
SAML_LASTNAME_ATTR_NAME=<SAML_LASTNAME_ATTR_NAME>
SAML_SIGN_REQUESTS=<SAML_SIGN_REQUESTS>
SAML_SIGN_METADATA=<SAML_SIGN_METADATA>
SAML_SIGNED_ASSERTION=<SAML_SIGNED_ASSERTION>
SAML_SIGNED_ENVELOPES=<SAML_SIGNED_ENVELOPES>

> ```

Reviewer: This needs to be intended as it belongs under the item.

By default, Trento expects the `username`, `email`, `firstName` and `lastName` attribute names. All these 4 attribute names are configurable using the next environment variables, following the same order: `SAML_USERNAME_ATTR_NAME`, `SAML_EMAIL_ATTR_NAME`, `SAML_FIRSTNAME_ATTR_NAME` and `SAML_LASTNAME_ATTR_NAME`.

So both the IDP and Trento must know how these 4 fields are mapped. For that, follow the next instruction:

1. Add the attributes if they don't exist in the IDP user profile. If they already exist, they name doesn't need to be changed, so the current values can continue being used.

1. Configure Trento to use the IDP attribute field names. For that, set the `SAML_USERNAME_ATTR_NAME`, `SAML_EMAIL_ATTR_NAME`, `SAML_FIRSTNAME_ATTR_NAME` and `SAML_LASTNAME_ATTR_NAME` environment values with the values configured in the IDP. For example, if the IDP user profile username is defined as `attr:username`, `SAML_USERNAME_ATTR_NAME=attr:username` should be used.

#### Checking SAML redirect URI

> Once the login is done succesfully, the IDP redirects the session back to Trento. This redirection is done to `https://trento.example.com/sso/sp/consume/saml`, so this URI must be set as valid in the IDP.

Author: It looks really appropriate!

#### Checking SAML redirect URI

Once the login is done succesfully, the IDP redirects the session back to Trento. This redirection is done to `https://trento.example.com/sso/sp/consume/saml`, so this URI must be set as valid in the IDP.

### Restarting Trento

Once the certificate is provided to the IDP, the IDP recreates its own <filename>metadata.xml</filename> file. This file defines which certificate is used to sign the messages by both sides. At this point, Trento Web must be restarted to use the new <filename>metadata.xml</filename> content.

If the <option>SAML_METDATA_CONTENT</option> option is being used, the content of this variable must be updated with the new metadata, as single line string. In the other hand, if <option>SAML_METADATA_URL</option> is used, the new metadata is automatically fetched. If neither of these steps are completed, communication will fail because the message signatures will not be recognized.

> If the used IDP has the endpoint to provide the <filename>metadata.xml</filename> file content, the usage of <option>SAML_METADATA_URL</option> is preferred, as further changes in the IDP will be fetched automatically by Trento when it is restarted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the used IDP has the endpoint to provide the <filename>metadata.xml</filename> file content, prefer the variable <option>SAML_METADATA_URL</option>. Trento will automatically fetch metadata when restarted.
```

```{=docbook}
<note>
  <para>This restart must be done manually, by the admin.</para>
</note>
```

> Follow the next instrucionts to restart with the configured options:

Reviewer: Typo:

```suggestion
Follow the next instructions to restart with the configured options:
```

OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET

: OIDC client secret

OIDC_BASE_URL

: OIDC base url

OIDC_CALLBACK_URL

: OIDC callback url where the IDP is redirecting once the authentication is completed (default value: <uri>https://#{TRENTO_WEB_ORIGIN}/auth/oidc_callback</uri>)

## Using OAuth 2.0

Trento integrates with an IDP that uses the OAuth 2 protocol to authenticate users accessing the Trento web console.

By default, OAuth 2.0 is disabled. You can enable OIDC when using RPM packages or using Docker images.

### Enabling OAuth 2.0 when using kubernetes deployment

To enable OAuth 2.0 when using kubernetes deployment with helm, proceed as follows:

1. Add the following variables to the previously documented helm installation command:

   ```
   HELM_EXPERIMENTAL_OCI=1 helm ... \
      --set trento-web.oauth2.enabled=true \
      --set trento-web.oauth2.clientId=<OAUTH2_CLIENT_ID> \
      --set trento-web.oauth2.clientSecret=<OAUTH2_CLIENT_SECRET> \
      --set trento-web.oauth2.baseUrl=<OAUTH2_BASE_URL> \
      --set trento-web.oauth2.authorizeUrl=<OAUTH2_AUTHORIZE_URL> \
      --set trento-web.oauth2.tokenUrl=<OAUTH2_TOKEN_URL> \
      --set trento-web.oauth2.userUrl=<OAUTH2_USER_URL> \

>       --set trento-web.oauth2.scopes=<OAUTH2_SCOPES>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
If the scopes parameter is optional, maybe we should remove it from here?

After a successful login, the IDP redirects the user's session back to Trento and redirected at <uri>https://trento.example.com/sso/sp/consume/saml</uri>. To ensure seamless SSO, this URI must be configured as valid within the IDP.

### Enabling SAML when using kubernetes deployment

To enable SAML when using kubernetes deployment with helm, proceed as follows:

1. Add the following variables to the previously documented helm installation command:

   ```
   HELM_EXPERIMENTAL_OCI=1 helm ... \
      --set trento-web.saml.enabled=true \
      --set trento-web.saml.idpId=<SAML_IDP_ID> \
      --set trento-web.saml.spId=<SAML_SP_ID> \
      --set trento-web.saml.metadataUrl=<SAML_METADATA_URL>
   ```

   To use the <option>SAML_METDATA_CONTENT</option> option rather than <option>SAML_METADATA_URL</option> use:

   ```
   HELM_EXPERIMENTAL_OCI=1 helm ... \
      --set trento-web.saml.enabled=true \
      --set trento-web.saml.idpId=<SAML_IDP_ID> \
      --set trento-web.saml.spId=<SAML_SP_ID> \
      --set trento-web.saml.metadataContent=<SAML_METADATA_CONTENT>
   ```

   Additionally, the following optional values are available:

   ```
   HELM_EXPERIMENTAL_OCI=1 helm ... \

>       --set trento-web.saml.enabled=true \
>       --set trento-web.saml.idpId=<SAML_IDP_ID> \
>       --set trento-web.saml.spId=<SAML_SP_ID> \
>       --set trento-web.saml.metadataUrl=<SAML_METADATA_URL> \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
These are mandatory parameters and therefore should not be mentioned here.
